---
layout: page
title: A Letter for Graduate and Upper Undergraduate Students
exclude: true
permalink: /ForGraduateStudents/
usemathjax: true
---

A letter to a senior undergraduate or beginning graduate student on the
purposes of graduate education and how to get the most out of it

Table of Contents
- [The feeling of unease](#the-feeling-of-unease)
- [What is the point of coursework after the core?](#what-is-the-point-of-coursework-after-the-core)
- [The pressure of a gas falling toward a black hole](#the-pressure-of-a-gas-falling-toward-a-black-hole)
- [The idea of a connection](#the-idea-of-a-connection)
- [What to expect when beginning research](#what-to-expect-when-beginning-research)

## The feeling of unease

When I was an undergraduate physics student thinking over the things
that I was learning, I would sometimes have a strange, uneasy feeling
of being confused but not being able to say about what.  I could
follow each step of the derivation or problem, but somehow could not
wrap my mind around the whole.  It was nothing definite enough to
formulate as a question or an objection.  My pieces of knowledge did
not contradict each other, but they sat uneasily together.
Considerations and lines of reasoning would make sense on their own,
but I could not see why they were applicable to one situation rather
than others.  I knew this feeling was an indication that I didn’t
really, deeply understand what I was learning; I didn’t like it and
looked forward to the day, perhaps in graduate school, when I would
really understand physics and this cautionary feeling would be gone
for good.

I have since realized that one never entirely gets to the bottom of
physics.  The troubling sense of vague confusion still comes to me
sometime, but I have learned to listen to it.  I have learned to treat
it as a friend.  Rather than a discouragement, it is an invitation to
understand more deeply.


## What is the point of coursework after the core

The classes you will take fall into two categories.  First, there’s a
repeat of the core subjects (classical mechanics, electromagnetism,
quantum mechanics, and thermal/statistical physics)at the graduate
level, a reprise with more advanced math.  Second, there are courses
applying physics to particular subjects:  nuclear and high energy
physics, astrophysics, biophysics, solid state physics, and the like.
Some among the application classes will match your anticipated
research area and thus have an obvious use to you.  The main thing
that they are all designed to do, though, is something more
subtle—what I call the de-modularization of your physics brain.

The outcome of undergraduate training is the following.  The
well-trained student is given a problem, and first recognizes it as a
mechanics, E&M, stat mech, or quantum problem.  This identification
made, he mentally uploads the corresponding bag of tricks.  For a
mechanics problem, find an equation of motion and solve the ODE; for a quantum
problem, write the Hamiltonian as a matrix, then find its eigenvalues
and eigenvectors; and so forth.  The problem-solving tricks for each
core subject are very different from each other, and within each core
subject one doesn’t have to worry about the others.  They’re almost
like four different subjects.  When given a classical mechanics
problem, for example, the undergraduate seldom worries about whether
relativistic or quantum effects might be important.  In a stat mech
class, one seldom worries about whether thermodynamic equilibrium is a
good assumption.

In the real world, when one studies a phenomenon, one doesn’t get to
decide a priori what the relevant physics and appropriate
approximations are; nature itself decides that.  Hence the real value
of a course in solid-state physics, astrophysics, or the like.  One
must first figure out what processes are important and what can be
ignored.  One must check the validity of any approximations.  This is
the first step of de-modularizaton.

The second step is to find the deep structural unity in the different
parts of physics.  The extra math in graduate core courses is in most
cases not primarily designed to facilitate problem solving.  The tools
you were given in undergraduate core courses are pretty well optimized
for solving the the most common problems of their respective type, at
the cost that the branches of physics don’t seem to have much to do
with each other.  Graduate-level theoretical physics, by contrast,
emphasizes broad concepts that unite the different areas of physics.
Such, for example, is the beauty of the idea of an action principle,
which can be used for Newtonian particle dynamics, relativistic field
theories, the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics,
establishing connections between quantum field theory and statistical
mechanics, and most other areas of physics.

Below, I will give examples of each of these things.

## The pressure of a gas falling toward a black hole

in progress

## The idea of a connection

in progress

## What to expect when beginning research

I think you will find that the greatest challenges to early success in
research are not intellectual but psychological.

Before seriously beginning research, a student’s main experience with
physics problem-solving is homework.  A homework set will contain a
few unrelated problems; it will be due about a week after it is handed
out.  When a student sits down to work on a homework assignment, he or
she may reasonably expect the gratification of finishing in a few
hours.  If the student has worked for a couple of hours on one problem
and made no progress on it, just one dead end after another, this
would be a sign of something wrong; probably the student doesn’t
understand the material well enough and should go to office hours
before proceeding.

Research works on a very different timescale.  A research project
often takes one to two years to get publishable results, and longer
stretches are not uncommon.  Most of your time will be spent on dead
ends before you hit on something that works.  On any given morning,
you will go into your office or lab, work on your project for a full
day, and when you go home for supper, the project will not be in a
significantly different state than when you came to work.  This is not
what you are used to, and there is a danger that you will fall into
one of two reactions.  First, you may become discouraged and
depressed; you may find it difficult to continue exerting your full
effort when the results seem so modest.  Second, you may become
complacent.  Since it is not disconcerting for a day to go without
progress, you may not worry when weeks or months go by without
progress.  That, however, is a problem and a sign that something about
the project or your approach to it should be reassessed.

Your advisor has gotten used to this and will be a help here.  He or
she will help you learn to split up your multi-year project into tiny
steps, so that you can have a reasonable-sized goal for what you will
do the next day or the next week.  Soon enough, you will learn to do
this yourself.  If you’re like me, you’ll keep a planner, write down
goals for a day, and get a great deal of satisfaction from putting
checkmarks next to them.  Your advisor will also have learned from
hard experience that weeks spent on dead ends, although unavoidable
(after all, it wouldn’t be research if people already knew the results
and how to get them), do add up and eventually become a problem.  You
want to learn to fail quickly, to recognize as soon as possible when
something isn’t going to work, so you should be somewhat impatient to
have a check of whether your idea can work before filling in all of
the details.

We wish PhD students to move as quickly as possible to the forefront
of research in some area.  The fastest way to do that is to specialize
to some very specific problem of current interest, so that is what we
do.  It’s probably the best thing, but it does have the disadvantage
of making PhD students narrow in their knowledge and competence.  A
mark of your growing scientific maturity is how you begin to broaden
yourself as you approach your dissertation.  Indeed, if all goes well,
this process continues at the postdoc and professor levels.  It is
something you must largely direct yourself, and it will often feel
like you must sacrifice immediate research productivity to do it.  In
the hour you spend at a colloquium, you could indeed have gotten more
done in the lab, but in the long run it will be better for your
development as a scientist to go to the colloquium anyway.  Consider
also the astronomy lunch program and the AMO journal club, where you
can discuss recent scientific developments with students and faculty.
Naturally, your broadening efforts will always be a secondary priority
after your research project, but it is important to keep expending a
bit of time and effort toward it week after week, year after year.
