---
layout: page
title: The nature and limits of science, and its role in a liberal education
exclude: true
permalink: /OnScience/
---

A letter to a non-science major, or member of the general public, on
science:  its power and limitations, its place in the general scheme
of intellectual cultivation

Table of Contents
- [The essence of science](#the-essence-of-science)
- [The supposed authority of science](#the-supposed-authority-of-science)
- [Science and other disciplines in the cultivation of the intellect](#science-and-other-disciplines-in-the-cultivation-of-the-intellect)

## The essence of science

Science forms an important part of any adequate conception of the
world, and each of you will be confronted by the claims of science and
scientists, if not as a student, then later as a consumer, patient,
parent, or citizen.

Science is not primarily a body of knowledge, but a way of thinking
and a way of investigating the world.  The only way to properly
appreciate it is to do it—to make predictions, gather data, analyze
it, assess uncertainties, formulate provisional conclusions.  Is this
difficult?  Certainly, but this is what it takes to be able to think
profitably on scientific matters.

The method of science is designed to address a particular type of
question about the natural world.  To take a simple example from
astronomy, it is found that all planets are roughly spherical in
shape.  This truth is not a matter of logical necessity—one could
certainly imagine planets with different shapes.  Nor is it an
isolated fact, like the number of blades of grass in my backyard,
which we would rightly dismiss as meaningless.  It is a pattern
encompassing many facts, a contingent pattern which could not be
inferred by pure thought but must be found by observation.  Contingent
patterns like this, once we notice them, cry out for some sort of
explanation in terms of broader and more fundamental patterns, which
we call the “laws of nature” and which themselves must be inferred
from observation and controlled experiment.

What can I hope to impart to my non-science major students in a single
semester?  First, you should get a taste of the methods of scientific
inference by actually gathering and analyzing data, although naturally
you will get only a taste of what science majors spend years learning.
You will learn some interesting facts about the universe, but while
facts are the outcome of scientific thinking, they are not its living
heart.  Above all, I want to instill a certain sensibility, a
distinctly scientific way of seeing the world, one that notices
contingent patterns in the world and says to itself “There must be an
explanation for that.”  Just to recognize and question in this way is
to be alive to a distinct and beautiful aspect of the world.

## The supposed authority of science

The first rule for thinking about the authority of science, is that,
as far as authority goes, there is no such thing as “science”.  That
is, there is no unitary entity called “science” that can bring the
plenitude of its authority to bear on any one question.  The reasons
for accepting any assertion of a group of scientists, or even the
consensus of an entire discipline, are nothing but the theoretical and
experimental evidence for that assertion in particular.  Each claim
stands on its own.  As a basic principle of the scientific method, it
is impermissible to insist that scientists be trusted because science
has had so many successes in the past.  The very reason science has
accumulated such a store of reliable facts is that each has had to
withstand this same vetting process.  Imagine one were instead to say,
“scientists have been right so often; isn’t it reasonable just to
trust them?”  This is equivalent to the more obviously fallacious “The
scientific method has been working so well for us up till now that we
should ditch it and replace it with the appeal to authority.”

I have spoken emphatically in order to counter two popular
misconceptions about the proper attitude toward science.  One is
summarized by the widespread but stupid entreaty to “trust science”,
that to doubt the pronouncements of scientific bodies is to be
“anti-science” as if all scientific claims were equally
well-established or were so logically interconnected that to doubt one
is to doubt them all.  As I have said, there is no authority called
“science” to command your faith, and as a method of pursuing truth,
science does not want your faith but if anything would prefer your skepticism.
Even within physics and its
daughter fields of chemistry and astronomy, some facts are better
established, others more speculative.  The existence of dark matter is
less certain than the laws of thermodynamics.  And physics is the gold
standard of scientific certainty and precision.  Among the biological
sciences too, some things are confidently known, others less so.  As
for what are shamelessly called the “social sciences”, these are for
the most part nothing but politically-motivated charlatanry.

There is a related but opposing misunderstanding of science, that of
postmodernism, which asserts that all putative structures of knowledge
(“metanarratives”) are in fact fabrications of sinister ruling powers
designed to keep oppressed masses or minorities in subjugation.
Science, or perhaps more vaguely the scientific worldview, is thus a
conspiracy of capitalism, white patriarchy, or some other bogeyman.
Given what I have said before, I shall not be rushing to the defense
of the “authority” of “science”.  The mistake of postmodernism to to
speak in meaningless abstractions.  There is no scientific worldview.
Take a specific claim—Faraday’s law (electromagnetic induction),
Bernouili’s principle (fluid dynamics), Kirchhoff’s radiation laws,
whatever.  Do you claim that these are social constructs?  Then I
would say to that with cheap equipment you should perform the relevant
simple experiments and *see for yourself*.  Having satisfied yourself on
the empirical matter, you may with the full blessing of the scientific
method incorporate these facts into any metanarrative of your
choosing.

Having said all of this, I realize that the free time and expertise of
each of us are limited, and practical considerations often force us to
simply take the word of what we take to be relevant experts.  This can be
perfectly rational.  However, remember that your access to these
experts is often mediated.  Journalists are given to misunderstanding
and sensationalism, so exercise due care.  Agnosticism, a simple
decision that one does not know whether or not to believe, is often
also rational.  Finally, any trust in scientists should be contingent
on their adhering to the scientific method; if on any subject dissent
from a party line subjects one to funding or career censure, or if
potential hires are required to take ideological loyalty oaths
(e.g. "diversity statements"), one can be sure that the scientific
method is not operative on matters related to this subject, and the
statements on it of compromised scientists and organizations should be
evaluated as one would any other admitted partisan.  Naturally, it is
also true that when a scientist gives an opinion outside his or her
field of expertise, this opinion should be weighted no more heavily
than that of anyone else.  This of course applies to the essay you are
reading.

## Science and other disciplines in the cultivation of the intellect

Wiser men than I have contemplated the proper nature and goals of a
university and a liberal education.  Rather than burden my text with
quotes and citations, I here acknowledge my debt to Matthew Arnold’s
*Culture and Anarchy*, Joseph Pieper’s *Liesure: The Basis of
Culture*, and above all to John Henry Newman’s *The Idea of a
University*.

Like other disciplines, science is both expansive and limited in
scope:  expansive because it takes all observable creation as its
object of study, limited because it considers only one aspect or mode of
things.  Its power comes from its limitation, because a particular
mode of knowing suggests a particular mode of reasoning, a particular
methodology.  Intellectual enterprises of this sort are called
“disciplines” because those who participate in them must learn to
conform their minds to the appropriate standards of understanding,
argumentation, and evaluation.

If done properly, the benefit—aside from the knowledge gained in that
particular discipline—is to foster certain intellectual virtues.  One
learns to think systematically; facts are not left isolated from each
other, but must always be related to each other in some coherent
whole.  If there are tensions or seeming contradictions, these should
at least be recognized and treated as problems to inspire deeper
investigation.  One learns the graciousness of intellectual
argumentation, of cordial disagreement,how not to take one arguing the
opposite side as a personal enemy but as a friend and fellow seeker
after the truth.  True intellectual discourse is at once impersonal
and also the bond of a community of surprising depth.  One learns
receptiveness, a determination to let one’s conclusions be dictated
not by prior prejudice or personal desire, but only by the object of
study itself and the disciplinary strictures on the way of knowing it.
True intellectual work thus has a fundamentally contemplative,
leisurely aspect (these words ultimately denoting intellectual
receptivity).  Above all, one learns patience and intellectual
humility.  The problems of a discipline are hard; one should not
expect any easy victories, and it is seldom the case that any position
is obviously right.  One should expect that deeper investigation will
reveal one’s current understanding to be fundamentally incomplete, and
this prospect should fill one with excitement.

The things themselves are more than any partial way of knowing reveals
them to be; if we forget that, then we know them only as abstractions.
The university itself is the institutional embodiment of a commitment
to recognize all aspects of the intelligibility of the world, each in
its place.  We as individuals must also take care that in mastering a
discipline we are not in turn mastered by it, forgetting its limits
and carrying them beyond their reach.  For example, a scientist who
tried to extract ethical or aesthetic judgments from scientific data
would be doing not only poor ethics or aesthetics, but also poor
science.  Philosophy is the subject charged with understanding the
relationship between disciplines.  Because of this unique role,
philosophy is privileged or cursed never to be able to become a
settled discipline with fixed methodology like others, despite the
efforts of Descartes, Kant, Husserl, and others who lacked their
genuis to find a way to make it such.  (One might ask, doesn't
philosophy have its own distinct fields of inquiry, such as
metaphysics, ethics, etc?  Yes, but they all have the quality that no
methodology can be agreed upon ahead of time--especially any which
dictates what counts as relevant facts--without in some sense begging
the questions these fields are meant to answer.)  While there are
professional scientists, professional philosophers, professional
historians, and professional literary critics, we are all amateur
scientists when we notice and investigate contingent patterns in the
world, amateur philosophers when we consider how our discipline
relates to the larger truth, amateur historians when we relate the
present to the past, and amateur critics when we reflect on the
stories we imbibe.  We benefit from the professionals but also
actively participate in our own amateurish ways.

The spirit of intellectual investigation differs profoundly from
another spirit now widely promoted on campuses—the spirit of activism,
of “changing the world” to “make it a better place”.  It is nowadays
considered normal, even laudable, for students to engage in various
forms of protesting on behalf of approved causes from the moment they
arrive as freshmen.  The assumption is that the student already knows
how the world needs to be changed without need of prior careful study,
contemplation, and growth of wisdom.  Ironically, the activist
mentality embraced by the intellectual class has little use for
intellectual virtues, as in this Manichaean vision the world is
divided cleanly and simply into utterly illegitimate oppressors and
their completely innocent victims, and there is no need to give the
oppressive order a careful hearing before pronouncing judgment.  Those
who disagree are not seen as colleagues but as enemies motivated by
irrational hatred.

The activist presumes to know two things.  First, there are matters of
fact, e.g. that they have assigned blame and calculated consequences
accurately.  Second, there are the moral principles invoked.  That the
latter are taken for granted is particularly troublesome, because
while students’ beliefs may seem self-evident because of their
hegemony in the contemporary urban West, historically and
cross-culturally they are quite anomalous.   For example, in most
times and places, cosmopolitan detachment was considered less
befitting a great soul than piety toward ancestors and attachment to
one’s land and culture; sex roles were considered not oppressive but
ennobling, as finding a calling within one’s very body to love,
self-sacrifice, and the bond between generations; human flourishing
was thought to be found not in self-expression but in conformity to
traditional, natural, and divine orders.  You may say that the
contemporary consensus is right and all others are wrong.  Perhaps you
are correct, but *what right do you have to this certainty*?  Have you
given the alternatives their due hearing, seeking out their strongest
defenders?  Is not the unexamined conformism of today’s students the
mark of just another form of provincialism?  When I read proclamations
from university leadership that WSU “stands in solidarity with” X,
“condemns” Y, and “has no place for” (a tendentious description of) Z, I
do wonder what has happened to the spirit of open-ended, dispassionate
inquiry.

All of this takes us rather far from the discipline of science, but
that is the point.  The “hard” sciences are the last bastion largely
uncontaminated by the spirit of activism.  Scientists have opinions on
the matters that agitate the rest of society—and by and large the
opinions of scientists on these matters are as rash and conformist
as most others’—but when practicing science we try to hold
ourselves to the standard of the old intellectual virtues.  In my
classes, this is how it will remain.  I am a genuinely inclusive
fellow—I welcome democrats, monarchists, fascists, communists,
anarchists, atheists, Christians, Muslims, Buddhists, and anyone else
who wants to engage in scientific investigation.